/* ------------------------------------------------------------------------ */
/* NAME: Sarah Larkin                                     UserID: selarkin  */
/* DUE DATE: 04/20/2020                                                     */
/* PROGRAM ASSIGNMENT #5                                                    */
/* FILE NAME: README                                                        */
/* PROGRAM PURPOSE:                                                         */
/*    Answers questions regarding the program implementation                */
/* ------------------------------------------------------------------------ */

Note: I do not specifically restate in each explanation that a monitor
guarantees mutual exclusion, but my discussion of variables being restricted
to a single value assumes the mutual exclusion is provided.

Question 1:
I guarantee that only three elves ask questions by having two counters, one
for the number of elves with problems and one for the elves
who are currently forming a group.  These counters are then associated with
condition variables that require the elves to wait.  Specifically, if there
are more than three elves who have problems, the remaining elves must wait 
on a condition variable turn.  A second if-statement after the first forms
the group and wakes Santa up.  To ensure that no more elves with problems
will but in, the variable counting the total number of elves with problems
includes those in asking the question and is decremented by three upon their
return.

Question 2:
No elf can leave before the question is answered.  Let us assume the first 
or second elves have left before the question was answered.  This would mean
they must have received a signal to answer.  This, however, is absurd:  
the only two possible sources of the signal would be from the last elf exiting
the previous time or Santa.  The last elf to signal answer does so before any
elves can enter, so it cannot be the source.  Neither can Santa be the source
because Santa waits for the third elf to let him know the question has been 
answered before he signals answer. Therefore, the first two elves to try to
leave are blocked from doing so until the question is answered.
Let us assume the third elf leaves before the question is answered.  That 
means that canElfExit must be true or questionAnswered must have been
signaled.  However questionAnswered cannot have been signaled before Santa 
answers the question and elfCanExit is set to false until the question is 
answered.  This is absurd: elfCanExit cannot be both true and false, and 
Santa cannot both signal and not signal a variable.  Therefore, the third elf
cannot leave early.  

Question 3:
Let us assume other elves can cut in with questions while a group of three
is waiting for an answer.  This means that pres must have a value less than
three for the elves to be able to proceed past the entry point or that turn
must have been signaled.  But this is impossible: turn is only signaled by 
an entering elf if the number of elves is less than three (and the last elf
to enter could not signal it once it has already entered) or by Santa after
a group has returned to work, and pres has a value of at least 4 - the three
elves asking the question plus the one trying to cut in.  Therefore, by 
reductio ad absurdum, no other elves can cut in with questions while a group
is already in with Santa.

Question 4:
Elves cannot ask questions of Santa while he is sleeping because he waits on
a condition variable which pauses him until he is signaled by either elves
or reindeer.  Because the wait keeps him from performing any tasks, he cannot
possibly be answering questions while he is on the waiting bench.  To keep 
the elves from bargeing past and ignoring Santa's sleepy state, the first and
second elves to join the group must wait for Santa to initiate a cascading
signal before they can proceed with their questions.  The third elf similarly
must wait for Santa to indicate that he is awake and ready for questions
before passing the next barrier of asking questions.

Question 5:
Let us assume Santa is awakened by a reindeer other than the last back from
vacation.  This would require that a the number of reindeer returned be fewer
than the total number of reindeer.  But this is impossible because only when
the reindeer equals the total number of reindeer can a reindeer signal Santa
to wake him up.  Santa also cannot help but go to sleep unless all reindeer
are back or elves are bugging him with questions.  Therefore, by proof by
contradiction, only the last reindeer can wake Santa.

Question 6:
I ensure that Santa always handles the reindeer first by placing them in
the first if-statement when Santa is figureing out who woke him up. Because
the value from this if-statement is returned, it determines for Santa whether
he should help elves or reindeer.

Question 7:
Let us assume the reindeer can sneak away for vacation.  This means that the
reindeer would have to receive a signal to holiday.  This, however, is not
possible.  Santa is the only one who can send the signal, and he cannot send
it unless all 9 reindeer are present and have first signalled him that they
are flying.  The reindeer cannot signal that they are flying until they have
received a signal from Santa for takeoff.  This takeoff signal is not sent by
Santa until he receives a signal that all 9 reindeer are present and harnessed.
This signal, in turn depends on a signal from Santa that depends on a signal
that all 9 reindeer are waiting to be harnessed.  Therefore, once they gather
to be harnessed, none of the reindeer can sneak away.

Question 8:
Let us assume that elves can ask questions while Santa is taking care of the
reindeer.  This would mean that santaOpen would have to be set to 1.
Otherwise, the elves would be blocked by having to wait for the third member
of their group to be let into the room.  However, this is impossible because
the reindeer set santaOpen to 0 when they start gathering for Santa to 
harness them to the sleigh.  Only Santa can set santaOpen again, and he only
does that upon return from the toy delivery.  Therefore, by proof by 
contradiction, no elves can ask questions while Santa is attaching the sleigh
and delviering toys.
